>> Will Sentance: So, we are now gonna
diagram through a full implementation of,
albeit, a very non-edge case handling,
visual virtual DOM.
So non-edge case handling,
it can only handle two elements.
Well, we're gonna make it
much more flexible very soon.
We start with something minimal so
that we can appreciate when we add
that flexibility, why we are doing it.
But in this case, we have two elements
represented in JavaScript in our code.
Now in practice, those are dynamic pieces
of content in that, which is kinda cool,
right, that's why HTML didn't give us.
It is the ability to have dynamic
content described in our code.
That will then evaluate to actual values,
name becomes empty string here,
name become, yeah, hello,
empty string, once we execute create
VDOM off that given state data in
JavaScript, once that data changes.
How does it change?
The only way users are allowed to
fetch what they see is via a change
of data in a handler.
What's the handler?
I can see it defined as handle here,
once that approach,
which we call a handle input.
Once that has been executed and
our data changes,
I have a feeling that update
DOM is gonna come along and
rerun create VDOM with our
new data parsed through,
funneled into our JavaScript
evaluated description in memory.
In VDOM, in global,
because everything's in global for ease,
of describing what's gonna
show up on our C++ DOM.
All this stuff would not
really be necessary,
people, if we just had direct
access to our C++ DOM.
Meaning, we didn't have to describe it
first in JavaScript even to get any hope
of knowing what's going on
in this separate runtime,
except by accessing get a set of
properties whenever we wanna find out, no.
Unfortunately, it doesn't exist,
so there we go, whatever.
We're dealing with it by building our own.
So here we go, we have our beautiful
new functioning pens here.
So there's our web page.
There it is.
I already know that, good.
Can you give me feedback?
>> Phil: [LAUGH]
>> Will Sentance: And now we have a DOM in
C++, a list of,
>> Will Sentance: Elements.
Take it all the way to here,
I think, a list of elements.
That's quite big and nice, okay?
Remember our schema is we load in,
first, a HTML file,
and that loads into our web
browser engine where the parser
interprets it and
fills into our DOM actual elements.
Did anyone get tired of this yet?
The JavaScript engine
kicks off when we hit
a JavaScript script tag in our HTML,
which we do,
which triggers our JavaScript
engine to start running.
But we know that from our HTML,
we already have a body element on the DOM,
it describes the overall page.
Our layout and render engine has
done the job of adding that element,
and all future ones, in this C++
list technique and object model of
the page to the document, old fashion
word for app, or page, I guess.
Okay, we then have our dividing line,
here it is,
which is JavaScript on the left,
C++ on the right.
And we have in memory in JavaScript,
what,
>> Will Sentance: What
do we have in memory in JavaScript?
Phil, what's our object
in memory in JavaScript?
Document.
Document,
that's there automatically as
soon as we load JavaScript.
All right, good stuff.
It has a bunch of useful methods.
What's the one we're using
here in Line 18, Phil?
>> Phil: Create element.
>> Will Sentance: Beautiful,
create element.
And that is also joined by
a getter-setter property body.
Both know where to look when
they're used because of our friend,
the hidden link to where, Phil?
>> Phil: The DOM.
>> Will Sentance: To the full DOM, the
full list of elements in C++, beautiful.
Exactly, that was a function, that one's
a property, but both act to execute code,
either getting or setting, or
running some other behavior.
Okay, now we get into regular JavaScript,
over to you Justice.
Do I ask the same people
always every time?
Okay, over to you John, what are we doing?
We're defining four variables,
what are we defining here?
>> John: We are declaring
name to empty string.
>> Will Sentance: Yep.
>> John: jsInput undefined, and
virtual DOM, I guess, [INAUDIBLE].
>> Will Sentance: Yep, all unassigned, and
these are gonna be filled
in with objects and VDOM.
>> John: And then we are declaring
a function create virtual DOM.
>> Will Sentance: Yeah,
I should really have put VDOM.
I'd like to see it as being above,
because the flow is down through.
So I think I wanna do this,
I think this is right.
Let me just switch these around.
Remember it has no order here, right?
In JavaScript, wherever I assign,
it doesn't have an order here,
it's just a visual representation.
None of this really is real here.
[LAUGH] Let's acknowledge that.
So VDOM, I think I'm gonna put
above because it's where the data's
gonna flow through, flow from here
to here down, not literally, but
just in terms of our
visual representation.
Then I'll put jsInput here and jsDiv here.
It's not ideal for referencing
the actual elements, but it's okay.
Perfect, thank you, John,
keep going as you said.
>> John: And
then we are declaring handle function.
>> Will Sentance: So, yeah, create VDOM.
>> John: Yeah.
>> Will Sentance: It's a function,
you did it already, it's on me.
Next one.
>> John: Then we are declaring
handle function, and
then we are declaring update DOM function.
>> Will Sentance: Then
handle is a function.
And then, as you say,
update DOM is a function,
which was what our dataToview
was previously roughly called.
And then we're now going to put all the
code that does the job of converting our
full description of what we want our
element to have, is gonna be an input.
It's gonna have this value property,
it's gonna have this handler.
We're putting all the job of
converting that generic set of
information in one function called what,
John?
>> John: Convert.
>> Will Sentance: Convert, exactly.
There it is.
And now we get to running our sort of
render every 15 millisecond cycle,
with our call to setInterval
to set what function, John,
to execute every 15 milliseconds?
Or at least, sorry, we'll get that right,
be added to the callback
queue every 15 milliseconds?
Can't say it's gonna execute
every 15 milliseconds, but
we add it back into JavaScript.
And that function is what?
>> John: Update DOM.
>> Will Sentance: Update DOM, and
it's the whole definition of it.
And then how many milliseconds again?
John, how many milliseconds every?
>> John: 15, yep.
>> Will Sentance: And so
that goes to timer in the web browser,
and adds an interval of 15
milliseconds executing update DOM.
I really should have left this dataToview,
but okay.
Although it's update DOM, I guess,
right, because it's, yeah,
converting our data into our view.
Okay, this line is done,
and we're done with it.
Let's make sure we have our cool stack,
I can hear it being whispered.
Raise your hand if you whispered that?
So I got a logic ball on, excellent, John.
Fantastic, call stack and
then event loop and
our call back queue, there it is.
Okay, all set up done.
We're getting quicker, sort of,
I mean, it's getting bigger,
it's taking longer but,
here we go, all set up done.
It's 50 milliseconds.
It's passed and 50 milliseconds passes and
so what function is gonna be called back,
Alexa, into JavaScript at 50
milliseconds or into the callback queue?
Update DOM
>> Alexa: Update DOM,
there's nothing in global.
>> Will Sentance: There's
nothing on the call stack,
all synchronous code is finished running,
so Alexa,
where's update DOM appear
>> Alexa: In the call stack?
>> Will Sentance: Yeah.
Okay, and it's gonna have
prints added by JavaScript and
Alexa, tell me what's going
to then happen in JavaScript.
>> Alexa: We invoke it.
>> Will Sentance: Yeah.
Threaded execution goes inside and
we create a new?
>> Alexa: Execution context.
>> Will Sentance: Execution context.
I don't want to get too
indulgent in it being shouted.
I love it, but
I don't want people to think I'm.
Right, perfect.
UpdateDOM.
>> Phil: [LAUGH]
>> Will Sentance: I don't want people to
think I'm sort of maniacal.
There it is, updateDOM.
So thread [INAUDIBLE] into it.
To be fair, it does invigorate me and
it also does give me a chance
to think what's happening next.
Now I know what's gonna happen.
All right, we go into it where we
are going to do our job of produce,
turning our little JavaScript kind of
preliminary representation of what's
gonna show up, into an evaluated,
actually data filled out version.
Kinda nice but everything's got a visual
version in the code that is obviously not
got the actual values as
that's gonna change and
now we're gonna get in JavaScript fully
evaluated data propagated at least
into the JavaScript memory version
of it into the global constant VDOM.
So help me out here Alexa,
if you don't mind.
>> Alexa: Yes, we're reassigning
VDOM to the evaluated result of
invoking createVDOM.
>> Will Sentance: Okay reassigning VDOM,
just again because it makes it easier
to the evaluated result
of calling createVDOM.
Which we know is going to return out and
we're not gonna go into it,
well we can, it's gonna go on the cool
sack, createVDOM is on the cool stack and
into it we go and it's going to return
out an array of two sub arrays.
Each describing a different element and
that's going to be returned,
you said into what global constant, Alexa?
>> Alexa: VDOM.
>> Will Sentance: VDOM, so I'm gonna
draw it actually out here just to save
redrawing it.
And can you just help me with what that
first array elements going to evaluate
to, Alexa?
>> Alexa: Yes, so the first sub
array will have the string input.
>> Will Sentance: String input.
>> Alexa: And then the next element will
be-
>> Will Sentance: What's our value
of name?
>> Alexa: Empty string.
>> Will Sentance: Empty string and then.
>> Alexa: Then a function definition.
>> Will Sentance: Yes, I handle function.
I'm just gonna put it up here but
it's the whole handle.
And technically it's referring to
this function here in memory, but
just to show it up on the code,
and then our next, and
there's all description,
by the way, just think about that.
It's gonna be an input element with no
value content right now, no preview text,
and a handler defined attached to it,
really cool.
None of this by the way is truth.
Again, these are efforts by us.
Not easy.
I'm not going to I,
[LAUGH] I'm not gonna say it.
I'm not gonna say it's too catchy.
All right, next element describing
associated corresponding DOM element,
we hope, is what Alexa?
>> Alexa: Our first, well,
our zeroth element is the stringDiv.
>> Will Sentance: Perfect.
>> Alexa: And then,
what evaluates to the string hello,
comma, space, exclamation point.
>> Will Sentance: Space,
exclamation mark, beautiful.
And we don't have a handler associated.
Okay, fab.
Look at that, a fully evaluated,
that means turned into its real values
representation of what's gonna show
up on the page that was described
first in lines four and
five in a generic when there's real data.
Evaluate this into what will end
up being the actual stateful,
probably a great way to save
content that shows up on the page.
All right, so now we go ahead and
do the conversion,
which is we're gonna take this content and
we're gonna run it through convert.
This content, this info and
run it through convert.
At the output access
objects are gona go here,
the output DOM elements are gonna go here.
Cuz a bit tricky here but let's do,
it we're inside of updateDom's execution
context and let's draw it out and
we are going to assign to,
don't get ahead of ourselves.
Getting a bit too confident.
Assigned to jsInput,
the evaluated result of calling convert.
Paul, can you help me out here?
We're calling convert
with VDOM position zero.
Well, talk me through it.
>> Paul: Okay, [COUGH], so
the variable jsInput is reassigned.
>> Will Sentance: Yes, beautiful.
>> Paul: The result from
the Convert function.
>> Will Sentance: Fantastic and
into where we go.
>> Paul: So into the Convert
function the node is passed that
is the VDOM 0 element which
is the first sub array.
>> Will Sentance: Yes
>> Paul: And so
the first thing it does
is it creates a constant.
>> Will Sentance: That's memory by
the way people that's our memory.
I forgot to write memory but
that's our local memory.
Yes exactly, you create a constant LM,
which is gonna be the result of
calling our DOM method, which is?
>> Paul: createElement.
>> Will Sentance: Exactly.
On the document object,
which we know has passed what?
>> Paul: It's passed the first-
>> Will Sentance: You're so kind,
doing my pronunciation.
[LAUGH] You're so kind Paul.
It's passed, there you go,
I'll do it for you.
It's passed what?
>> Paul: The first element of
that subarray, which is input.
>> Will Sentance: Exactly.
>> Paul: The string input.
>> Will Sentance: The string input,
fabulous.
And that uses the link from
the document object on which
the createElement method is found to
the overall C++ list of elements,
the DOM in which is going to
create what type of element,
or is gonna instantiate
what class in the DOM?
It's gonna be type what Paul?
>> Paul: Input.
>> Will Sentance: Input, perfect.
Yeah, and we then get as its
output in JavaScript, what Paul?
Cuz we we need a link to that, but
we can't just store a link, so
we get created what in JavaScript?
It's a, right,
a JavaScript object that represents that.
Yes, exactly, with a hidden
link to that input on the DOM,
and it has all the relevant functions,
in this case.
Well, we're gonna NWL, now here, do you
see people, we're gonna end up trying to
use text content, even though that's not
gonna actually do anything to our input.
Cheeky, lazy, sure.
In practice, a convert function here would
absolutely assess for is the element.
In this case, is it linked to an input
element or is it linked to a DIV or
is it linked to something else?
Do not try and
set text content of an input element.
In order to save code and space,
if it doesn't break it, we're not worried.
But yeah, we do know that there's
input linked object accessor is
going to have on it at least value and
on input as useful.
Get a set of properties for
editing this created input element.
Perfect, well,
let's go ahead and use them.
In line 19, we're gonna use
textContent on that element, and
it's going to allow us to set the text.
Well, it's not gonna do any harm.
We're going to skip over it.
And instead we're gonna hit setting its
value, which does show up to the user.
And we are going to set its value
via the setter, elem.value.
Remember elem is now our local inside
this execution context, convert label.
We're not calling a JS input
anymore here or not yet.
It's generically elem because
we're inside convert before we
return that out into JS input.
And here the label of v object on
which the value setter is elem,
and then we use that value setter to
set on the DOM node the value
of input to what pool?
What's our value on the description,
not name, sorry,
I mean, it's certainly is name,
but it's from the what?
Node position 1, our content-
>> Paul: Basically an empty string.
>> Will Sentance: Yeah,
exactly it, please stop.
Exactly, yeah,
stop trying to say what I'm not.
And then finally we also do this with our
on input setter, and set the handler for
handling input on the DOM
node to what function
that is in our array describing
our element in full, Paul?
>> Paul: The handle function.
>> Will Sentance: The handle function,
brilliant, there it is.
The handle function, and
that is going to show there, beautiful.
God, it doesn't help having pens
work as wonderful, I'm so happy.
Okay, beautiful.
And now, in order that we
can still persist the link,
after closing this execution
context to that DOM element,
we are going to return out that
object into what global, for
our ease of diagramming, Paul,
into what global constant?
>> Paul: jsInput.
>> Will Sentance: jsInput.
There it is.
Return, haven't written return for
a while, but there it is, return.
And there we have in global,
our accessor object to input,
>> Will Sentance: To input,
there it is, to input and
it has its setter getter.
Properties, yay, whoa.
Thank you, thank you, yeah, yeah, exactly.
No, not me to Paul, to Paul.
That was really fab, Paul, thank you.
Yeah, excellent.
Okay, so now,
do we do the next one by analogy?
You bet we do.
[LAUGH] I'm not sure what that voice was.
Regrettable I think is all it was.
Yeah, we do by analogy.
So jsDiv, Alexa, if you don't mind,
just sorta give me what the object is
gonna be in the associated element here.
Just talk me through as much as you can
and I'll just diagram fairly simply.
>> Alexa: So we're redefining
jsDiv to be the result of calling
convert on element one of our vDOM,
>> Will Sentance: Yep, there it is,
which is?
>> Alexa: So using document createElement,
we are gonna create a div node
on the DOM that is unattached.
>> Will Sentance: Yeah, perfect.
It is actually pretty unhelpful to me to
do this without going through it line by
line, but it's great.
So, we're calling convert,
we're parsing in vDOM position 1,
as Alexa says, which is div hello.
And now our node parameter inside
the convert execution context refers to
the index one element describing,
hopefully,
the content we're gonna
display on the DOM.
Exactly as Alexa said.
We are then going to grab its node
position 0, which is, what Alexa?
>> Alexa: Div.
>> Will Sentance: Div, and
we're going to pass that string to
createElement to create in the DOM a,
what type of element?
>> Alexa: A div.
>> Will Sentance: A div.
And notice, well,
we'll see that in a second.
There it is, a div, perfect.
Now we're gonna use
the textContent setter that
on the returned out inside
of here as element.
So I guess, we could actually show that,
couldn't we?
Well I guess we're gonna be-
>> Alexa: Locally stored.
>> Will Sentance: Locally stored, exactly.
>> Alexa: [INAUDIBLE] object
linked to our new DOM node.
>> Will Sentance: Yeah, which we're then
gonna use a textContent setter on to
set the text of the, so Alexa,
keep verbalizing for me.
>> Alexa: Yes, so
we're gonna set the text content of
that new div to be what is
at index one of our node,
which is the string "Hellos, !".
>> Will Sentance: Perfect, and we use the
textContent accessor on the elem, which is
the object that we are now, because value
in on input don't do anything to a div.
So we are now gonna return out that
elem with its accessor into what global
constant according to line 13, Alexa?
>> Alexa: jsDiv.
>> Will Sentance: jsDiv, brilliant.
And so now at least we can therefore see.
So what was our useful getter
setter that we had on here
that we just used in line 19, sorry Alexa?
>> Alexa: textContent.
>> Will Sentance: textContent, exactly.
textContent, and
that we then used to change
the linked div element.
Perfect, neither of those are yet
appended on the page, but
what do we do in line 14, Alexa?
>> Alexa: We use the replaceChildren
method on the body of the document object,
or to the body property
of the document object.
And we pass in those new JavaScript
objects that link to our
new unattached DOM elements, and
then replaceChildren will append
them to the body on the DOM.
>> Will Sentance: These are all linked.
Here they are, and so we now attach.
We use these two accessor links and
we use body's accessor link to attach
these two to body as children.
Funny word, but there we go.
And then that is field on the body,
empty string, nothing on there,
and a div with hello, !.
And that is the closing out of
our all in one data to view
updateDOM converter, is that correct?
Yes, it is, and
there they are displayed on the page.